JAN KOK's BRILLIANTLY SIMPLE IDEA SHOWING HOW TO RUN SINGLE DIGIT
RANGE-VOTING ELECTIONS ON TODAY'S PLURALITY VOTING MACHINES
----Warren D. Smith July 2005-----------------------------------

SINGLE DIGIT RANGE VOTING (DEFINITION):
I. You provide as your vote in an N-candidate election,
  an N-tuple of numbers, each entry consisting of a single
  digit {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9} or an INTENTIONAL-BLANK.
II.  The candidate with the highest average score is elected (where blanks are
    not incorporated into the averaging).
Example:  3 voters and 3 candidates:
          voter#1:  (9, 9, 0)
          voter#2:  (5, *, 9)    where *=BLANK
          voter#3:  (2, 2, 9)
   average scores:  (16/3=5.33, 11/2=5.50, 18/3=6.00)
and the third candidate wins.

JAN KOK's IDEA:
Kok pointed out that on any kind of voting machine capable of handling
multiple parallel plurality-elections (i.e. all the voting machines 
in the USA) it 
also is possible to make them handle single-digit range voting. 

You transform the election  Joe vs Dick vs Jane
to three parallel plurality (pseudo)elections
    JoeElection:    Joe0 vs  Joe1 vs ..  Joe9,
   DickElection:    Dick0 vs Dick1 vs .. Dick9,
   JaneElection:    Jane0 vs Jane1 vs .. Jane9.
The results of these three 10-candidate plurality elections -- i.e. the total count for Joe9, 
the total count  for Joe8, etc are easily used to find the result of the single 3-candidate
single-digit-range election.  With, say, 5000 voters, the total amount of work to
do that is tiny compared to the amount of work the voters did to vote.

This transformation works fine except for the fact that it multiplies
the number of "candidates" by 10, which may strain some kinds of voting
machine.

The same kind of transformation could also be used to do Approval Voting on 
plurality machines, namely  Joe vs Dick vs Jane  (approval election)  is
transformed to three 2-"candidate" plurality elections
      Disapprove_Joe   vs  Approve_Joe,
      Disapprove_Dick  vs  Approve_Dick,
      Disapprove_Jane  vs  Approve_Jane.

Note that these transformations both also permit the improved
variant forms of range and approval voting with "you get to leave it
blank" votes for candidates you feel ignorant about, and we could
have (or not have) an "intentional blank" button.

DEFINITION OF "DUMB PLURALITY MACHINE":
It computes the total number of votes, and the N totals for each of the N candidates,
and it prevents the voter from entering (or at least refuses to count) an illegal "overvote."

ERROR DETECTION:
Plurality machines that detect overvotes would detect illegal range votes.
Plurality machines that detect undervotes would detect "unintentional blank" votes.

THEOREM: Any dumb plurality machine can be used to perform a single-digit range voting
election (with "X" no-opinion scores allowed, or forbidden, either is ok) if it is capable
of handling multiple plurality races.

EVALUATION:
How well would all this work in practice?  Well frankly I would
prefer to have voting machines purposely designed for range voting, 
but it  is nice to know
that present voting machines can handle the job.  But how well depends
on the machine:

LEVERS
in New York State I use lever machines with about 300 binary levers... 
there is a map so the voter can figure out which levers to depress... 
Kok's scheme
would work fine with them with an appropriate new "map" - and I think it
would be just as easy and clear for the voters as it currently is -
BUT considerably more levers would be consumed per contest,
which might force typical elections to use more than 1 voting machine,
while they presently use one.   For that reason approval would be better than
range voting in practice on such machines.

OPTICAL SCAN
I think Kok's plan would work quite excellently with many kinds of 
optical scan ballots (and many kinds of punch card ballots too).
In fact there would seem to be little or no advantage for approval
versus range on such machines. A range election would be just as easy
for a voter to understand and do as a plurality election.

BUTTERFLY BALLOT PUNCH CARD (ALA PALM BEACH FLORIDA 2000)
I think Kok's scheme would be in big trouble on this sad 
kind of voting machine.
A 10-candidate contest would become a 100 "candidate" 10-contest
election which would require a large number, not just one, of those
puke-inducing butterfly cards, really inconveniencing voters although
in principle it would work.

"D.R.E." MACHINES
Which contain computers, touch screens, etc, obviously can be programmed
to handle practically any kind of voting... as well as practically 
any kind of election fraud...

PEN-AND-PAPER HUMAN-COUNTED BALLOTS LIKE IN IOWA
Both AV and single-digit RV are easy to handle, no Kok-transformation
required.
